---
layout: distill
title: Mind is the 'real' 'infinity'
description: "Thoughts on how the human brain works"
tags: brain DNA RNA Universe
date: 2025-04-10
featured: true
mermaid:
  enabled: true
  zoomable: true
code_diff: true
map: true
chart:
  chartjs: true
  echarts: true
  vega_lite: true
tikzjax: true
typograms: true

authors:
  - name: Md. Rasel Mandol
    url: "https://raselm.me"

toc:
  - name: Introduction
  - name: Human Understanding
  - name: Personal Example
  - name: Parallel Universes
  - name: Observation
  - name: Interpretation
  - name: Limits of Perception and Visualization
  - name: Capturing Human Thought
  - name: Conclusion
  - name: References

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
---

## Introduction

This is the most interesting part of human, according to me - how the human **brain** works. From a cell to graveyard, the journey is very interesting. If we think how we thought when we were 2 years old, we will be lost in thinking; still, we will probably not find the actual representation of that time - how we thought, when asking for something, even when we didn't learn to speak. Science has made so many things possible, till now. From understanding human brain signals to talking with AI (will talk about this someday), whatever we see beside us these days became possible, which has been contributed by science and a lot of people who were involved with this process since the beginning - from making humans social to dealing with machines today.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/auf_Helgoland
        .jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
A colony of Northern gannet. An example of social behavior. (Wikipedia)
</div>

---

## Human Understanding

If we look further, deeper into the structure of human DNA, we will find something interesting - from the sequencing of patterns to RNA and mRNA. Everything is very interesting. I think, **"the human will never understand each other, not even 1%"**. It's so complex that, even if you get confirmation that you understood a person for a time period - let's say 10 seconds - there is a near 100% possibility that it is not true.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/Snapshot-of-DNA-in-motion.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
DNA in motion (Photo from: Accelerating the Research in Drug Delivery System; A Challenge of the Earth Simulator to Medical Innovation)
</div>

---

## Personal Example

What do we want? What does our heart want? Let's take an example. I liked technology since the very beginning of my educational life, most probably when I was in grade/class 2. I never liked biology, but I had to study biology from class 9 to 12 (high school). When I was in my first year of undergrad, in mind something happened - what I say in my language is, **"Brain Signal Death"**, which ultimately continued till 3rd semester. And then the process was stopped and my brain towards biology developed a gradient polishing of unknown signals (I will try to explain this in another post), which I can't actually say is love, but is something similar to getting attracted in a spiritual way (this is something I want to discuss/write someday), but the absence of caring is vital here - neither positive nor negative - something but not 0. It holds a value which is ready to be formed but not now, almost there but hasn't reached.

---

## Parallel Universes

Now, think about an exact same cloned version of Rasel, but the only difference is, he liked Biology. But point to be noted here - neither I nor the Rasel 2 did anything related to Biology; it just sat idle inside - the hate and like both.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/Cosmos-animation_Friedmann-closed.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
Cosmos animation of a cyclic universe. (Wikipedia)
</div>

Now, both are in the same situation, in two different universes where time unit is the same. At the same time, same coordinates, but two different universes, and both facing the same situation, looking at a block of code:

```c
int main(int argc, char *argv[]){

    int array[] = { 1,2,3,4,5,6};
    size_t size = sizeof(array)/sizeof(array[0]);
    printf("%d\n",size);
    printf("%p\n",array);
    printf("%d\n",0[array]);
    for(int i = 0; i < size; i++){
        printf("%d\t\t",i[array]);
    }
    printf("\n");
    for(int i = 0; i < size; i++){
        printf("%p\t\t",i[array]);
    }                                               
    printf("\n");
    for(int i = 0; i < size; i++){
        printf("%d\t\t",0[array]+(sizeof(array)/sizeof(array[i])-1));
    }

    return 0;
}
```

---

## Observation

Let's take it more forward, a connection between the two universes is there. Someone right there in between measuring every bit of pulse, neuron signals, brain signals, movement and everything about both of them, and visualizing in real time. If both look at the same time to the code, what will be the differences?

Most probably, 2 probabilities:

1. "Same", which tends to infinity  
2. "Completely different", which also tends to infinity

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/space_force_GIF.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
gif from: https://giphy.com/gifs/space-force-2WH6sqGKm027uq1Q9G
</div>

Mathematically, we have to consider a lot of things, but we cannot guarantee whether the two Rasel will feel the same or not - even though they are same since birth, everything same, but only one difference, which was never used, can create a possibility near infinity.

---

## Interpretation

Let:

- \( B_1, B_2 \): Brain states of Rasel 1 and Rasel 2  
- \( I \): Input (the code)  
- \( R \): Response

Then:

```math
R_1 = f(B_1, I)  
R_2 = f(B_2, I)
```

Where \( B_1  pprox B_2 \), but with a dormant difference \( \delta \), then:

```math
|R_1 - R_2| 	o \infty \quad 	ext{as } \delta 	o 	ext{influence}
```

This shows sensitive dependence on initial conditions.


---

## Limits of Perception and Visualization

Let’s take it more forward - if the block of code is divided into characters (including white spaces) and every unique brain signal, if we want to visualize with separate unique colors, it will run out of colors and still cannot fulfill the requirements.



Looking at a computer screen, two different persons, at the same time, at the same picture, can create **infinity new pictures** (considering how they are looking, processing, which part they are uniquely removing from the view, etc.) inside their brains.


---

## Capturing Human Thought

Can even the smartest and fastest, and the largest storage, capture this? Is it mathematically possible?

Theoretically, the answer leans towards no.

- Subjective experience has infinite permutations  
- Information theory limitations  
- Heisenberg’s uncertainty (as a metaphor)

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/Sequential_superposition_of_plane_waves.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
The superposition of several plane waves to form a wave packet. This wave packet becomes increasingly localized with the addition of many waves. The Fourier transform is a mathematical operation that separates a wave packet into its individual plane waves. The waves shown here are real for illustrative purposes only; in quantum mechanics the wave function is generally complex. (Wikipedia)
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/Schrodingers_cat.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
Schrödinger's cat: a cat, a flask of poison, and a radioactive source connected to a Geiger counter are placed in a sealed box. As illustrated, the quantum description uses a superposition of an alive cat and one that has died. (Wikipedia)
</div>


Will continue from here - (2025-04-10)

---

## Conclusion

To come to a conclusion - why our mind wants the desires, and how we process the regrets - most probably the infinity will be processed in our brain in a **readable time**.

---

## References

1. Shannon, C. E. (1948). *A Mathematical Theory of Communication*.  
2. Lorenz, E. N. (1963). *Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow*.  
3. Penrose, R. (1989). *The Emperor's New Mind*.   
4. Gödel, K. (1931). *On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica*.  
5. Heisenberg, W. (1927). *Über den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik*.